---
title: Electromagnetism as curvature
---

It's well-known that gravity can be modeled as curvature in spacetime; this is the content of general relativity, which has been the prevailing description of gravitation in modern physics for well over half a century. In this post, I'd like to quickly sketch out how another basic interaction of nature -- electromagnetism -- can also arise as curvature via the modern form of gauge theory. The context in which this curvature arises is more mathematically exotic than is the case with gravitation and general relativity, so some fairly heavy-duty machinery will be invoked.

Recall that in quantum mechanics one describes a particle or a system by means of a mathematical entity known as a wavefunction. This wavefunction is just a function assigning a complex number to every point of spacetime. For us, spacetime is four-dimensional Minkowksi spacetime, assumed to be flat.

In the case that there is only one spatial dimension, this is easy to visualize when we fix a moment in time. Space is represented by an infinite line, and the complex numbers assigned to points in space by the wavefunction can be seen as vectors attached and orthogonal to this line, wrapping around it in various oscillatory patterns. A momentum state, for instance, would look like a corkscrew.

With three spatial dimensions, we can't easy visualize the resulting object which represents both space, time, and the complex geometry of the wavefunction. We know exactly what sort of object it is, though. It's a **fiber bundle**: the base space is 4D Minkowski spacetime and the fibers are copies of the complex plane. Thus we can say that a wavefunction is actually a continuous section of a complex line bundle over spacetime.

We know from quantum theory that one can multiply a wavefunction by a fixed complex phase (that is, a complex number of unit modulus) without affecting the physical meaning of the wavefunction. This is because the magnitude of the wavefunction at each point represents the probability of a measurement finding the particle to reside at that particular point, and multiplication by a number of unit length clearly does not change this probability. Thus there exists a **global symmetry** whereby we may rotate the entire wavefunction by a fixed complex phase, and the result must represent the same state.

Let us consider what happens when we promote this to a *local* symmetry, also known as a **gauge symmetry**. This means that we allow the complex phase to vary continuously across different points of spacetime. We run into issues here: the result is not necessarily the same physically.

The difficulty is a familiar one from differential geometry. Because the phase now varies from point to point, we no longer know how to compare the value of the wavefunction at one point to its value at a nearby point. Intuitively, this is related to the notion of parallel transport; we don't know anymore how to properly parallel transport a vector above one base point of the bundle to another fiber above a nearby base point.

Suppose we introduce a modified version of parallel transport which takes into account the differing phases. As we know, this is achieved by introducing an affine connection on the bundle which possesses nontrivial curvature. In this new picture, a wavefunction becomes a section of a complex line bundle with structure group \\(U(1)\\); recall that \\(U(1)\\) is the unit circle in the complex plane, that is, the group of unit modulus complex numbers under multiplication. Stunningly, the Riemann curvature tensor of the bundle connection which arises in this way is the electromagnetic field tensor. All of electromagnetism can be (in theory) derived from this point.

We also get something else for free. One observes that the Lie algebra of the continuous symmetry group \\(U(1)\\) is one-dimensional. It follows from a version of Noether's theorem that the generator of this algebra leads to a conserved quantity. While we won't produce the full proof here, this quantity is just electric charge in this case. Thus this machinery also produces the law of conservation of electric charge in spacetime from more basic principles via Noether's theorem.