---
title: A whirlwind tour of tensors
---

What follows is an unforgivingly fast and fairly sophisticated tour of tensors as they show up in modern mathematics and physics. The aim here is to present a unifying model of tensors which links together all the many different definitions and interpretations that show up in difference pieces of literature. The notion of a tensor has been overloaded over time, so I hope to clarify how all the different formulations are in fact equivalent, but this cannot be done rigorously without diving in all the way.

Tensors turn certain bilinear operations into linear operations. This is useful since linear maps are among the easiest objects in mathematics to study and understand.

More precisely, suppose $V,W,X$ are vector spaces and $f:V\times W \rightarrow X$ is a bilinear map. Using tensors, we can procure a *linear* map $g : M \rightarrow X$ which is in many respects the "same" as $f$, where $M$ is a mystery space whose precise identity and nature we will deduce below.

To construct $M$ and $g$, let's first go back to $V\times W$. $f$ is a bilinear map on this space, but we'd like to convert it to a linear map on some slightly different space. If you're familiar with free objects, your intuition might suggest that we could begin with the free vector space generated by the *set* $V\times W$. Indeed, the universal property satisfied by free objects lets us extend $f$ from a map on the set $V\times W$ to a *linear* map on the free vector space $F$. Let's call the extended map $f'$.

The problem is that the free vector space over the Cartesian product $V\times W$ is potentially almost incomprehensibly big. It's much bigger than we need. So let's see if there are any special relations we can introduce into this free vector space $F$ in order to collapse it into something more reasonable.

We can write this free space as the direct sum

$F = \bigoplus_{(x,y) \in V\times W} \mathbb{R} \delta_{(x,y)}$

where I have tacitly assumed that our vector spaces are defined over the field of real numbers.

All we need to do is introduce the obvious bilinearity relations. We do this via the familiar machinery of quotient spaces. That is, we consider the subspace $D$ spanned by the relations $\delta_{(x+z,y)} - \delta_{(x,y)} - \delta_{(z,y)}$, etc., and we compute the quotient space $F/D$. It's easy to check that the kernel of the extended linear map $f'$ contains these generators of $D$ and thus $f'$ is well-defined on $F/D$.

In practice, we write $V\otimes W$ for the space $F/D$, and we introduce a special map $\otimes : V\times W \rightarrow V\otimes W$ defined via $\otimes(v,w) = \delta_{(v,w)} \text{ mod } D$. We often write this map using infix notation instead as $v\otimes w$.

We can now finally state that $M = V\otimes W$ and $g = f\circ \otimes$.

Now at this point tensors show up in a lot of places and in a lot of forms. Many of the more unexpected places they pop up arise from the various tensor powers of a vector space: $V^{\otimes k}$. When a physicist speaks of a "contravariant rank $k$ tensor", they really mean an entity that represents the collection of all possible coordinate representations of a specific element of $V^{\otimes k}$. In practice, they will refer to a *specific *coordinate representation as the tensor and will then decree that the tensor must transform in a particular contravariant way under change of coordinates. This transformation law is simply a statement of the natural relation automatically satisfied by two different coordinate representations of an element of $V^{\otimes k}$.

To be a bit more precise about it, consider a rank 2 tensor over 3-space $\mathbb{R}^3$. Select three basis vectors for 3-space: $x,y,z$. Then a rank 2 tensor is a linear combination of the so-called elementary tensors $x\otimes x, x\otimes y,x\otimes z, \dots, z\otimes x,z\otimes y,z\otimes z$. There are exactly 9 such elementary tensors, and so we can think of a general rank 2 tensor in 3-space as an assemblage of 9 numbers. Each of the 9 components of the tensor represents a quantity that has been associated with a particular *ordered pair *of basis vectors in the underlying vector space. This leads directly to a natural way to visualize such a tensor and immediately shows the relevance to physics.

Similarly, when someone refers to a "covariant rank $l$ tensor", they really mean the collection of all possible coordinate representations of a specific element of $(V^*)^{\otimes l}$, where $V^*$ is the dual space of $V$.

You'll also hear physicists sometimes speak of "mixed" tensors with $k$ contravariant indices and $l$ covariant indices. They're referring to all coordinate representations of a specific element of $V^{\otimes k}\otimes (V^*)^{\otimes l}$.

It's also very common to hear a tensor referred to as a real-valued multilinear map that takes $k$ tangent vector arguments and $l$ cotangent vector arguments. If we denote the space of such maps as $T_k^l$, then this results directly from the important isomorphism

$T_k^l\cong (V^*)^{\otimes l}\otimes V^{\otimes k}$.

We can get even more exotic by considering the direct sum of all tensor powers of a single vector space $V$, which we might call the *tensor algebra *over $V$. The tensor algebra is naturally graded and admits some extremely useful quotient algebras, including the exterior algebra from which the theory of differential forms ultimately stems. From this point it's a short (but intense) trip to some of the great pillars of modern mathematics, including de Rham cohomology connecting analysis, geometry, topology, and algebra.

